GCSE
ENGLISH LANGUAGE
Paper 1  Explorations in creative reading and writing

Insert

The source that follows is:

Source A:         21st Century prose-fiction

 The Life of Pi by Yann Martel

 An extract from the middle of a novel written in 2001

Please turn the page over to see the source

IB/G/Jun23/E5

8700/1

PMT

Source A

2

This extract is from the middle of a novel.  The narrator, a teenage boy called Pi, is in a large
lifeboat in the Pacific Ocean.  There are no people with him in the lifeboat but there are several
animals, including an orang-utan, a zebra and a hyena.

1

5
6

10

15

19

20

25

30

35

It was the hyena that worried me.  I had not forgotten Father’s words.  Hyenas
attack in packs whatever animal can be run down.  They go for zebras, gnus and
water buffaloes, and not only the old or the infirm in a herd but full-grown members
too.  They are hardy attackers, rising up from buttings and kickings immediately,
never giving up for simple lack of will.  And they are clever; anything that can be
distracted from its mother is good.

I could hear the hyena whining.  I clung to the hope that a zebra, a familiar prey,
and an orang-utan, an unfamiliar one, would distract it from thoughts of me.  I kept
one eye on the horizon, one eye on the other end of the lifeboat.

I am not one to hold a prejudice against any animal, but it is a plain fact that the
spotted hyena is not well served by its appearance.  It is ugly beyond redemption.
Its shaggy, coarse coat is a bungled mix of colours, with the spots having none of
the classy ostentation of a leopard’s, they look rather like the symptoms of a skin
disease.  The head is broad and too massive, with a high forehead, like that of a
bear, but suffering from a receding hairline, and with ears that look ridiculously
mouse-like, large and round, when they haven’t been torn off in battle.  The mouth
is forever open and panting.  The nostrils are too big.  The tail is scraggly and
unwagging.  All the parts put together look doglike, but like no dog anyone would
want as a pet.

I was hoping the hyena would stay under the tarpaulin.  I was disappointed.  Nearly
immediately it leapt over the zebra and onto the stern bench.  There it turned on
itself a few times, whimpering and hesitating.  I wondered what it was going to do
next.  The answer came quickly: it brought its head low and ran around the zebra in
a circle, transforming the stern bench, the side benches and the cross bench just
beyond the tarpaulin into a twenty-five-foot indoor track.  It did one lap-two-three-
four-five-and onwards, non-stop, till I lost count.  And the whole time, lap after lap, it
went yip yip yip yip yip in a high-pitched way.

My reaction, once again, was very slow.  I was seized by fear and could only watch.
The beast was going at a good clip, and it was no small animal.  The beating of its
legs against the benches made the whole boat shake, and its claws were loudly
clicking on their surface.  Each time it came from the stern I tensed.  It was hair-
raising enough to see the thing racing my way; worse still was the fear that it would
keep going straight.

After a number of laps it stopped short at the stern bench and crouched, directing
its gaze downwards, to the space below the tarpaulin.  It lifted its eyes and rested
them upon me.  The look was nearly the typical look of a hyena – blank and frank,
jaw hanging open, big ears sticking up rigidly, eyes bright and black.  I prepared for
my end.  For nothing.  It started running in circles again.

IB/G/Jun23/8700/1

PMT

3

When an animal decides to do something, it can do it for a very long time.  All
morning the hyena ran in circles going yip yip yip yip yip.  Every time the hyena
paused at the stern bench, my heart jumped.  And as much as I wanted to direct my
attention to the horizon, to where my salvation lay, it kept straying back to this
maniacal beast.

Things ended in typical hyena fashion.  It stopped at the stern and started
producing deep groans interrupted by fits of heavy panting.  I pushed myself away
on the oar till only the tips of my feet were holding on to the boat.  The animal
hacked and coughed.  Abruptly it vomited.  A gush landed behind the zebra.  The
hyena dropped into what it had just produced.  It stayed there, shaking and whining
and turning around on itself, exploring the furthest confines of animal anguish.  It
did not move from the restricted space for the rest of the day.

40

45

50

END  OF  SOURCE

IB/G/Jun23/8700/1

PMT

4

There is no source material printed on this page

Copyright information

For confidentiality purposes, all acknowledgements of third-party copyright material are published in a separate booklet.  This booklet is published after
each live examination series and is available for free download from www.aqa.org.uk.

Permission to reproduce all copyright material has been applied for.  In some cases, efforts to contact copyright-holders may have been unsuccessful and
AQA will be happy to rectify any omissions of acknowledgements.  If you have any queries please contact the Copyright Team.

Copyright © 2023 AQA and its licensors.  All rights reserved.

IB/G/Jun23/8700/1

*

236G8700/1

*

PMT


