GCSE
ENGLISH LANGUAGE
8700/1
Paper 1 Explorations in creative reading and writing
Mark scheme
June 2022
Version: 1.0 Final
* *
JUN228700/1/MS

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
Mark schemes are prepared by the Lead Assessment Writer and considered, together with the relevant
questions, by a panel of subject teachers. This mark scheme includes any amendments made at the
standardisation events which all associates participate in and is the scheme which was used by them in
this examination. The standardisation process ensures that the mark scheme covers the students’
responses to questions and that every associate understands and applies it in the same correct way.
As preparation for standardisation each associate analyses a number of students’ scripts. Alternative
answers not already covered by the mark scheme are discussed and legislated for. If, after the
standardisation process, associates encounter unusual answers which have not been raised they are
required to refer these to the Lead Examiner.
It must be stressed that a mark scheme is a working document, in many cases further developed and
expanded on the basis of students’ reactions to a particular paper. Assumptions about future mark
schemes on the basis of one year’s document should be avoided; whilst the guiding principles of
assessment remain constant, details will change, depending on the content of a particular examination
paper.
Further copies of this mark scheme are available from aqa.org.uk
Copyright information
AQA retains the copyright on all its publications. However, registered schools/colleges for AQA are permitted to copy material from this booklet for their own
internal use, with the following important exception: AQA cannot give permission to schools/colleges to photocopy any material that is acknowledged to a third
party even for internal use within the centre.
Copyright © 2022 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.
2

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
Introduction
The information provided for each question is intended to be a guide to the kind of answers anticipated
and is neither exhaustive nor prescriptive. All appropriate responses should be given credit.
Level of response marking instructions
Level of response mark schemes for GCSE English Language are broken down into four levels (where
appropriate). In the first column each level is identified with one or two key words that represent the
differences in the skills then described. These key words show the progression from Level 1 to 4 and
are:
Level 4 Perceptive, detailed
Level 3 Clear, relevant
Level 2 Some, attempts
Level 1 Simple, limited.
This is followed in the second column by a description of the different qualities required in the student’s
answer for that level. These are called the skills descriptors. In order to reach a given level, a student
must fulfil one or more of the skills descriptors for that level.
The third column of the mark scheme is the Indicative Standard. This is an important feature of the mark
scheme for GCSE English Language. It provides exemplification of the skills descriptors at each level
and offers a small number of different comments at the required standard to give an indication of the
quality of response that is typical for that level. It shows the progression from Level 1 to 4.
The Indicative Standard is not intended to be a model answer nor a complete response, and it does not
exemplify required content. Students may reach a given level by making one or more comments of the
quality demonstrated by the Indicative Standard and do not have to meet all the skill descriptors at that
level.
The standardising scripts will further exemplify each of the levels. You must refer to the standardising
material throughout your marking.
Step 1 Annotate the response
When marking a response you should first read through the student’s answer and annotate each section
using the comments from the statement bank to show the qualities that are being demonstrated, as
instructed during standardising. You can then award a level and a mark.
Step 2 Determine a level
Start at the lowest level of the mark scheme and use it as a ladder to see whether the answer meets the
descriptors for that level. The descriptors for the level indicate the different qualities that might be seen
in the student’s answer for that level. If it meets the lowest level then go to the next one and decide if it
meets this level, and so on, until you have a match between the level descriptor and the answer. With
practice and familiarity you will find that for better answers you will be able to quickly skip through the
lower levels of the mark scheme.
The Indicative Standard column in the mark scheme will help you determine the correct level.
Remember, students may reach a given level by making one or more comments of the quality
demonstrated by the Indicative Standard and do not have to meet all the skill descriptors at that level. It
is not the number of references, but the quality of the comments that will determine the level. The
annotation you added to the script at Step 1 will help you determine the correct level.
3

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
Step 3 Determine a mark
Once you have assigned a level you need to decide on the mark. This requires you to fine tune within
the level to see how well each of the skills descriptors for that level has been met. A student only has to
meet a skills descriptor at a given level once to be awarded that level. Since responses rarely match a
level in all respects, you need to balance out the range of skills achieved and allow strong performance
in some aspects to compensate for other skills that may be only partially fulfilled. Again, the annotation
added at Step 1 will help you determine the mark.
Reference to the standardising scripts throughout the marking period is essential. This will help you
apply the level descriptors accurately and consistently. There will usually be an answer in the
standardising materials which will correspond with each level of the mark scheme. This answer will have
been awarded a mark by the Lead Examiner. You can compare the student’s answer with the example
to determine if it is the same standard, better or worse than the example. You can then use this to
allocate a mark for the answer based on the Lead Examiner’s mark on the example.
You may well need to read back through the answer as you apply the mark scheme to clarify points and
assure yourself that the level and the mark are appropriate.
An answer which contains nothing of relevance to the question must be awarded no marks.
Advice
In fairness to students, all examiners must use the same marking methods. The following advice may
seem obvious, but all examiners must follow it closely.
1. Refer constantly to the mark scheme and standardising scripts throughout the marking period.
2. Always credit accurate, relevant and appropriate responses that are not necessarily covered by the
mark scheme or the standardising scripts.
3. Use the full range of marks. Do not hesitate to give full marks if the response merits it.
4. Remember the key to accurate and fair marking is consistency.
5. If you have any doubt about how to allocate marks to a response, consult your Team Leader.
4

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
SECTION A: READING – Assessment Objectives
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas.
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts.
AO2 • Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to
achieve effects and influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to
support their views.
AO3 • Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as how these are
conveyed, across two or more texts.
AO4 • Evaluate texts critically and support this with appropriate textual references.
SECTION B: WRITING – Assessment Objectives
AO5 • Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting
tone, style and register for different forms, purposes and audiences.
• Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features
to support coherence and cohesion of texts.
AO6 • Candidates must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for
clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling and punctuation. (This
requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for each specification as a
whole).
5

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022

Assessment
|     |     | Section A  |
| --- | --- | ---------- |
Objective

|     | AO1  | ✓    |
| --- | ---- | ---- |

|     | AO2  | ✓    |
| --- | ---- | ---- |

|     | AO3  | N/A  |
| --- | ---- | ---- |

|     | AO4  | ✓    |
| --- | ---- | ---- |

|     |     | Section B  |
| --- | --- | ---------- |

✓
AO5

|     | AO6  | ✓    |
| --- | ---- | ---- |

|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
6

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
0 1 Read again the first part of the source, from lines 1 to 6.
List four things about the brush house and what is happening in this part of the source.
[4 marks]
Give 1 mark for each point about the brush house or what is happening:
• responses must be drawn only from lines 1–6 of the text
• responses must relate to the brush house and what is happening
• responses must show some evidence of selection
• responses can be quotations or paraphrase
• responses can be a single word; full sentences are not required.
Note: The indicative content must not be treated as exhaustive, and reference must be made to the
selected section of the text.
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts
This assesses bullet point 1: identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
Indicative content; students may include:
• the sun is warming the house – 1 mark
• the sun is breaking through the house crevices in long streaks – 2 marks
• the house was warm – 1 mark
• the house has crevices – 1 mark
• sunlight broke into the house – 1 mark
• a streak fell on the bed-box – 2 marks
• the bed-box is hanging – 1 mark
• the bed-box is hanging from the ceiling – 2 marks
• there is a hanging bed-box – 2 marks
• the bed-box is hanging on ropes – 2 marks
• there is a hanging bed-box – 2 marks
• there is a bed-box that is hanging from the roof support – 3 marks
• baby Coyotito is in a hanging bed-box – 2 marks
• there is a tiny movement near the hanging box – 4 marks
• there is a scorpion in the room – 1 mark
• the scorpion is moving slowly – 2 marks
• the scorpion’s stinging tail is out – 1 mark
• a scorpion is moving down the rope – 2 mark
• the scorpion has its tail out behind him – 2 marks
• there was a tiny movement – 2 marks
• the scorpion makes a tiny movement – 2 marks
• it was a tiny movement that drew their eyes towards the hanging box – 5 marks
• Kino and Juana froze in their position – 1 mark
• Kino froze – 1 mark
• Juana froze – 1 mark
7

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
REJECT:
• the baby moved in a tiny movement
• Kino and Juana are freezing
Ask yourself the following questions:
• Does it tell you something about the brush house or what is happening?
• Is it from the correct section of the text?
• Is it true/accurate?
• If there is no subject in the response and you precede the response with ‘It is/There is/are...’, does it
make sense?
0 2 Look in detail at this extract, from lines 7 to 17 of the source.
How does the writer use language here to describe the conflict between Kino and the
scorpion?
You could include the writer’s choice of:
• words and phrases
• language features and techniques
• sentence forms.
[8 marks]
AO2
Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to achieve effects and
influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to support their views
This question assesses Language ie: Words/Phrases/Language Features/Language
Techniques/Sentence Forms
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard is not a model answer, nor a complete
response. Nor does it seek to exemplify any particular content.
Rather, it is an indication of the standard for the level.
Level 4 Shows detailed and/or In describing Kino’s reactions to the danger, the
Detailed perceptive understanding of writer is using an extended metaphor of the ‘Song of
and/or language: Evil’ and the ‘Song of the Family’, to present the
perceptive • Analyses the effects of the contrast between good and evil. This is illustrated
analysis writer’s choices of by ‘In his mind a new song had come, the Song of
7–8 marks language Evil… and underneath, the Song of the Family cried
• Selects a judicious range plaintively’. Here, by using this juxtaposition
of textual detail between good and evil, the writer portrays the
• Makes sophisticated and Family threatened by the ‘savage, secret, dangerous
accurate use of subject melody’. This triplet of adjectives suggests a
terminology primitive, covert threat, embodied in the scorpion,
forcing Kino to react swiftly and decisively to protect
his family.
8

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
Level 3 Shows clear understanding of The writer creates a contrast between the image of
Clear, relevant language: a ‘Song of Evil’ and ‘Song of the Family’, by
explanation • Explains clearly the effects describing the evil threat to Kino’s family,
of the writer’s choices of represented by the scorpion. Here the writer
5–6 marks language describes the threat as the ‘music of the enemy’ and
• Selects a range of relevant ‘dangerous melody’, suggesting a huge sense of
textual detail immediate danger surrounding the family. The
• Makes clear and accurate adjectives ‘savage’, ‘secret’ and ‘dangerous’ suggest
use of subject terminology a hidden threat the family faces. The words ‘savage’
and ‘dangerous’ emphasise the struggle Kino faces
against the evil threatening his family.
Level 2 Shows some understanding The writer is showing Kino trying to protect his family
Some of language: from the evil scorpion. The writer is describing the
understanding • Attempts to comment on scorpion as the ‘music of the enemy, of any foe of
and comment the effect of language the family’, suggesting that Kino’s family is in
• Selects some appropriate danger. The adjectives ‘savage, secret, dangerous’
3–4 marks textual detail show the scary situation the family is in.
• Makes some use of subject
terminology, mainly
appropriately
Level 1 Shows simple awareness of The writer is showing that Kino’s family is threatened
Simple, limited language: by the scorpion, and Kino must protect them. The
comment • Offers simple comment on phrase ‘savage, secret, dangerous melody’ shows
the effect of language the danger the family is in.
1–2 marks • Selects simple references
or textual details
• Makes simple use of
subject terminology, not
always appropriately
Level 0
Nothing to reward
No marks
Note: If a student writes only about language outside of the given lines, the response should be
placed in either Level 1 or Level 2, according to the quality of what is written.
AO2 content may include the effect of language features such as:
• extended metaphor: of the ‘Song of Evil’ and the ‘Song of the Family’ presenting contrast between
good and evil.
• personification: ‘breath whistled’ suggesting the loudness and autonomy of his breath.
• adverbs: ‘delicately’, ‘quietly’, ‘noiselessly’ and ‘smoothly’, suggesting Kino’s exceptional focus on
the scorpion without betraying his presence.
• short simple sentence: eg, ‘Kino stood perfectly still’, emphasising his self-control and composure.
• adjectives: eg ‘startled’ indicates the surprise of the initial shock for Kino.
• repetition: eg ‘smoothly’ reinforces his controlled behavior.
9

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
0 3 You now need to think about the whole of the source.
The text is from the beginning of a novel.
How has the writer structured the text to interest you as a reader?
You could write about:
• what the writer focuses your attention on at the beginning of the source
• how and why the writer changes this focus as the source develops
• any other structural features that interest you.
[8 marks]
AO2
Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to achieve effects and
influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to support their views
This question assesses how the writer has structured a text. Structural features can be: at a
whole text level eg. beginnings/endings/perspective shifts; at a paragraph level eg. topic
change/aspects of cohesion; and at a sentence level when judged to contribute to whole structure.
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard is not a model answer, nor a complete
response. Nor does it seek to exemplify any particular content.
Rather, it is an indication of the standard for the level.
Level 4 Shows detailed and The extract begins with the introduction of a positive
Perceptive, perceptive understanding image of a calm and sunny setting in what initially
detailed of structural features: appears to be a happy family home. However, the sun
analysis • Analyses the effects of is also illuminating the scorpion, causing a shift in
the writer’s choices of perspective that is now focused on the threat facing
7–8 marks structural features Kino’s child. This instantly creates tension and fear as
• Selects a judicious the scorpion advances. The ‘tiny movement’ is
range of examples mirrored by Kino who, ‘glided quietly’. Both are poised
• Makes sophisticated and the text switches quickly between them, ‘It stopped’
and accurate use of and ‘Kino stood perfectly still’. Here, the writer holds
subject terminology the reader in the tension. The scorpion’s sting delivers
the threat of death to baby Coyotito and this fast-paced,
fear-induced action reveals how quickly the parents
react.
10

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
Level 3 Shows clear The writer begins the text by introducing the setting by
Clear, relevant understanding of structural describing the family home lit by sunlight. This is
explanation features: followed by a shift of perspective by bringing the sun
• Explains clearly the from outside to the inside of the house, creating a
5–6 marks effects of the writer’s sense of calm. However, when the writer then
choices of structural introduces the scorpion it creates tension and the
features reader wonders what might be in store for Kino’s family
• Selects a range of Now the calmness changes to panic. The scorpion
relevant examples stings baby Coyotito, after which the pace of the action
• Makes clear and increases, showing how fast Kino and Juana act to
accurate use of subject save their baby, and the speed of their reaction
terminology highlights their fear.
Level 2 Shows some At the beginning of the text, the writer introduces the
Some understanding of structural setting, followed by a different perspective by the sun
understanding features: coming in to the house. Then the reader is made aware
and comment • Attempts to comment on of the danger and worries about what is going to happy
the effect of structural to baby Coyotito. After the baby is stung by the
3–4 marks features scorpion, the pace of the events gets faster, when Kino
• Selects some and Juana act fast to save their baby, suggesting to the
appropriate examples reader that their baby is important to them.
• Makes some use of
subject terminology,
mainly appropriately
Level 1 Shows simple awareness At the beginning, the writer shows a family home, but
Simple, limited of structural features: then changes focus to the baby getting stung. In the
comment • Offers simple comment end, events speed up, making the reader feel sorry for
on the effect of structure the parents.
1–2 marks • Selects simple
references or examples
• Makes simple use of
subject terminology, not
always appropriately
Level 0 Nothing to reward
No marks
AO2 content may include the effect of ideas such as:
• Perspective shift: the opening of happy, calm beginning accentuates the ‘evil’ that enters the
house, and the imminent threat it is about to pose.
• Pace change: relaxed beginning which builds, fast-paced, to tension and intensity.
• Focus shift between Kino’s reaction at the beginning to Juana as a leader in the second half of the
text.
• Introduction of problem: the scorpion stinging baby Coyotito in middle of the text, symbolic of
intrusion of evil into the family and evoking empathy.
• Zooming in on details: vivid description/imagery of the scorpion and Juana sucking out the poison
• Dialogue: showing interaction between the parents, as they deal with the tragedy as a family unit.
• Cliff-hanger ending leaving the reader with questions and feeling concerned about baby Coyotito.
11

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
0 4 Focus this part of your answer on the second part of the source, from line 19 to the end.
A student said, “In this part of the story, Juana’s reaction to the danger facing their baby is
different to Kino’s. The writer shows that Kino is unhelpful, and it is Juana who tries to save
the baby’s life.”
To what extent do you agree?
In your response, you could:
• consider Juana’s and Kino’s reactions to the danger facing their baby
• evaluate how the writer presents Juana’s and Kino’s different reactions
• support your response with references to the text.
[20 marks]
AO4
Evaluate texts critically and support this with appropriate textual references
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard is not a model answer, nor a
complete response. Nor does it seek to exemplify any
particular content. Rather, it is an indication of the
standard for the level.
Level 4 Shows perceptive and Kino’s instinctive reaction to eliminate the threat by
Perceptive, detailed evaluation: killing the scorpion is no less effective than Juana’s,
detailed • Develops a convincing whose focus is on keeping the baby alive. Juana’s
evaluation and critical response to reaction to save her baby reveals her maternal instinct
the focus of the statement for the child that is ‘nearly everything’ in her world. The
16–20 marks • Shows perceptive writer creates contrast between the parents’ protective
understanding of writer’s instincts by employing animal imagery to portray their
methods reactions. Although initially described as ‘patient’ and
• Selects a range of ‘fragile’, the writer uses a simile to present Juana’s
judicious textual detail eyes ‘as cold as the eyes of a lioness’, emphasising
• Evaluates critically and in her controlled behaviour and determination to protect
the child. The writer shows Kino’s almost animalistic
detail the effect(s) on the
anger at the scorpion as the source of evil, with the use
reader
of verbs like ‘snarling’ and ‘bared’. This imagery reveals
Kino as an aggressive hunter, stalking the scorpion
until he destroys it, whereas Juana’s primal impulse is
to protect her child.
12

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
Level 3 Shows clear and relevant The writer presents both parents reacting equally
Clear, evaluation: quickly to the threat to their baby, and therefore I
relevant • Makes a clear and disagree that Kino is unhelpful. Each parent makes a
evaluation relevant response to the different but equally important contribution, with Kino
focus of the statement removing the threat of the scorpion forever and Juana
11–15 marks • Shows clear doing all she can to save her child. The writer uses
understanding of writer’s animal imagery, ‘bared’, ‘fury flared’ and ‘snarling’,
methods describing Kino’s reaction to the threat as that of a wild
• Selects a range of animal. Juana, on the other hand, is compared to a
relevant textual lioness in ‘her eyes as cold as the eyes of a lioness’,
references emphasising her control and taking charge of the
situation. We imagine Juana as cool and collected as
• Evaluates clearly the
a lioness before she pounces into action, suggesting
effect(s) on the reader
she will not stop until the baby is helped. Even though
they prioritise different things, both Kino and Juana
show a natural instinct to save their baby.
Level 2 Shows some attempts at I disagree that Kino is ‘unhelpful’ in his reaction to the
Some, evaluation: threat to the baby. Juana seems to be better at dealing
evaluation • Makes some response to with it than Kino. The writer describes Kino with words
the focus of the statement like ‘snarling’ and ‘bared’ to show that he is like an
6–10 marks • Shows some animal trying to kill the scorpion. The writer also
understanding of writer’s describes Juana as a lioness with a simile ‘her eyes as
methods cold as the eyes of a lioness’, showing the reader that
• Selects some appropriate the parents try to protect their baby. Kino and Juana
textual reference(s) both have to act fast, but in different ways.
• Makes some evaluative
comment(s) on effect(s)
on the reader
Level 1 Shows simple, limited I do not agree that Kino is ‘unhelpful’ because he kills
Simple, evaluation: the scorpion. But Juana saves the baby by sucking the
limited • Makes a simple, limited poison, so they are different. Kino and Juana are
comment response to the focus of described using words like ‘snarling’, ‘bared’ and
the statement ‘lioness’. This tells us that they both want to save the
1–5 marks • Shows limited baby.
understanding of writer’s
methods
• Selects simple, limited
textual reference(s)
• Makes simple, limited
evaluative comment(s) on
effect(s) on reader
Level 0 Nothing to reward.
No marks
Note: Reference to the writer’s methods may be implicit without specific mention of the writer.
13

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
Similarly, the evaluative ‘I do/I don’t agree’ may be implicit.
In both these cases credit should be given according to the quality of what is written.
AO4 content may include the evaluation of ideas such as:
• contrast between effectiveness of Kino’s and Juana’s reactions; perhaps gender stereotypes of
Kino as ‘the protector’ father, and Juana as ‘the nurturing’ mother.
• description of Juana as having ‘iron’ in her, implying her incredible strength of character and
determination, which amaze Kino.
• Juana's character described as usually ‘obedient’ ‘respectful’ ‘cheerful’ and ‘patient’, indicating her
multifaceted character, which adapts to the situation.
• the final line, ‘Kino followed her’ (simple sentence), possibly suggesting Juana as leading the
situation, and Kino trusting her decision without question.
• Kino successfully kills the scorpion.
• Juana’s persistence and determination to get the poison out of her baby, exemplified by ‘sucked
hard and spat and sucked again’ (alliteration).
• the interaction between Kino and Juana, highlighted by the dialogue “Go to get the doctor.”
14

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
0 5 A travel website is running a creative writing competition and will publish the winning entries.
Either
Write a description of an unusual place to stay, as suggested by this picture:
or
Write a story about a life-saving rescue.
(24 marks for content and organisation
16 marks for technical accuracy)
[40 marks]
15

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
AO5 Content and Organisation
Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting tone, style and register for
different forms, purposes and audiences.
Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features to support coherence and
cohesion of texts.
| Level    |          | Skills descriptors                              |
| -------- | -------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| Level 4  | Upper    | Content                                         |
|          | Level 4  | •  Communication is convincing and compelling   |
  •  Tone, style and register are assuredly matched to purpose and
19–24 marks
|     | 22–24  | audience  |
| --- | ------ | --------- |

Compelling,  marks  •  Extensive and ambitious vocabulary with sustained crafting of
linguistic devices
Convincing
Communication
Organisation

•  Varied and inventive use of structural features
•  Writing is compelling, incorporating a range of convincing and
complex ideas
•  Fluently linked paragraphs with seamlessly integrated discourse
markers
|     | Lower    | Content                          |
| --- | -------- | -------------------------------- |
|     | Level 4  | •  Communication is convincing   |
  •  Tone, style and register are convincingly matched to purpose and
|     | 19–21  | audience  |
| --- | ------ | --------- |
marks  •  Extensive vocabulary with conscious crafting of linguistic devices

Organisation
•  Varied and effective structural features
•  Writing is highly engaging with a range of developed complex
ideas
•  Consistently coherent use of paragraphs with integrated discourse
markers
| Level 3  | Upper    | Content                                 |
| -------- | -------- | --------------------------------------- |
|          | Level 3  | •  Communication is consistently clear  |
13–18 marks    •  Tone, style and register are clearly and consistently matched to
|     | 16–18  | purpose and audience  |
| --- | ------ | --------------------- |

Consistent,  marks  •  Increasingly sophisticated vocabulary and phrasing, chosen for
Clear    effect with a range of successful linguistic devices
Communication
|     |     | Organisation  |
| --- | --- | ------------- |
•  Effective use of structural features
•  Writing is engaging, using a range of clear, connected ideas
•  Coherent paragraphs with integrated discourse markers
16

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
|     | Lower    | Content                              |
| --- | -------- | ------------------------------------ |
|     | Level 3  | •  Communication is generally clear  |
  •  Tone, style and register are generally matched to purpose and
13–15
audience
marks  •  Vocabulary clearly chosen for effect and appropriate use of
linguistic devices

Organisation
•  Usually effective use of structural features
•  Writing is engaging, with a range of connected ideas
•  Usually coherent paragraphs with range of discourse markers
| Level 2  | Upper    | Content                                      |
| -------- | -------- | -------------------------------------------- |
|          | Level 2  | •  Communicates with some sustained success  |
7–12 marks    •  Some sustained attempt to match tone, style and register to
|     | 10–12  | purpose and audience  |
| --- | ------ | --------------------- |

Some successful  marks  •  Conscious use of vocabulary with some use of linguistic devices

Communication
|     |     | Organisation  |
| --- | --- | ------------- |
•  Some use of structural features
•  Increasing variety of linked and relevant ideas
•  Some use of paragraphs and some use of discourse markers
|     | Lower    | Content                            |
| --- | -------- | ---------------------------------- |
|     | Level 2  | •  Communicates with some success  |
  •  Attempts to match tone, style and register to purpose and
|     | 7–9  | audience  |
| --- | ---- | --------- |
•  Begins to vary vocabulary with some use of linguistic devices
marks
|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
Organisation
•  Attempts to use structural features
•  Some linked and relevant ideas
•  Attempt to write in paragraphs with some discourse markers, not
always appropriate

17

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
| Level 1  | Upper    | Content                 |
| -------- | -------- | ----------------------- |
|          | Level 1  | •  Communicates simply  |
1–6 marks    •  Simple awareness of matching tone, style and register to purpose
|     | 4–6  | and audience  |
| --- | ---- | ------------- |
•  Simple vocabulary; simple linguistic devices
Simple, Limited  marks
| Communication  |     |     |
| -------------- | --- | --- |
Organisation

•  Evidence of simple structural features
•  One or two relevant ideas, simply linked
•  Random paragraph structure

|     | Lower    | Content                   |
| --- | -------- | ------------------------- |
|     | Level 1  | •  Limited communication  |
  •  Occasional sense of matching tone, style and register to purpose
|     | 1–3  | and audience  |
| --- | ---- | ------------- |
•  Simple vocabulary
marks
|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
Organisation
•  Limited or no evidence of structural features
•  One or two unlinked ideas
•  No paragraphs
Level 0  Students will not have offered any meaningful writing to assess.
| No marks  | Nothing to reward.  |     |
| --------- | ------------------- | --- |

18

MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2022
AO6 Technical Accuracy
Students must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with
accurate spelling and punctuation. (This requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for each
specification as a whole.)
Level Skills descriptors
Level 4 • Sentence demarcation is consistently secure and consistently accurate
• Wide range of punctuation is used with a high level of accuracy
13–16 marks
• Uses a full range of appropriate sentence forms for effect
• Uses Standard English consistently and appropriately with secure control of
complex grammatical structures
• High level of accuracy in spelling, including ambitious vocabulary
• Extensive and ambitious use of vocabulary
Level 3 • Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and mostly accurate
• Range of punctuation is used, mostly with success
9–12 marks
• Uses a variety of sentence forms for effect
• Mostly uses Standard English appropriately with mostly controlled grammatical
structures
• Generally accurate spelling, including complex and irregular words
• Increasingly sophisticated use of vocabulary
Level 2 • Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and sometimes accurate
• Some control of a range of punctuation
5–8 marks
• Attempts a variety of sentence forms
• Some use of Standard English with some control of agreement
• Some accurate spelling of more complex words
• Varied use of vocabulary
Level 1 • Occasional use of sentence demarcation
• Some evidence of conscious punctuation
1–4 marks
• Simple range of sentence forms
• Occasional use of Standard English with limited control of agreement
• Accurate basic spelling
• Simple use of vocabulary
Level 0 Students’ spelling, punctuation etc is sufficiently poor to prevent understanding or
No marks meaning.
19
