PMT
GCSE
ENGLISH LANGUAGE
8700/1
Paper 1 Explorations in creative reading and writing
Mark scheme
June 2023
Version: 1.0 Final
* *
JUN238700/1/MS

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
Mark schemes are prepared by the Lead Assessment Writer and considered, together with the relevant
questions, by a panel of subject teachers. This mark scheme includes any amendments made at the
standardisation events which all associates participate in and is the scheme which was used by them in
this examination. The standardisation process ensures that the mark scheme covers the students’
responses to questions and that every associate understands and applies it in the same correct way.
As preparation for standardisation each associate analyses a number of students’ scripts. Alternative
answers not already covered by the mark scheme are discussed and legislated for. If, after the
standardisation process, associates encounter unusual answers which have not been raised they are
required to refer these to the Lead Examiner.
It must be stressed that a mark scheme is a working document, in many cases further developed and
expanded on the basis of students’ reactions to a particular paper. Assumptions about future mark
schemes on the basis of one year’s document should be avoided; whilst the guiding principles of
assessment remain constant, details will change, depending on the content of a particular examination
paper.
Further copies of this mark scheme are available from aqa.org.uk
Copyright information
AQA retains the copyright on all its publications. However, registered schools/colleges for AQA are permitted to copy material from this booklet for their own
internal use, with the following important exception: AQA cannot give permission to schools/colleges to photocopy any material that is acknowledged to a third
party even for internal use within the centre.
Copyright © 2023 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.
2

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
Introduction
The information provided for each question is intended to be a guide to the kind of answers anticipated
and is neither exhaustive nor prescriptive. All appropriate responses should be given credit.
Level of response marking instructions
Level of response mark schemes for GCSE English Language are broken down into four levels (where
appropriate). In the first column each level is identified with one or two key words that represent the
differences in the skills then described. These key words show the progression from Level 1 to 4 and
are:
Level 4 Perceptive, detailed
Level 3 Clear, relevant
Level 2 Some, attempts
Level 1 Simple, limited.
This is followed in the second column by a description of the different qualities required in the student’s
answer for that level. These are called the skills descriptors. In order to reach a given level, a student
must fulfil one or more of the skills descriptors for that level.
The third column of the mark scheme is the Indicative Standard. This is an important feature of the mark
scheme for GCSE English Language. It provides exemplification of the skills descriptors at each level
and offers a small number of different comments at the required standard to give an indication of the
quality of response that is typical for that level. It shows the progression from Level 1 to 4.
The Indicative Standard is not intended to be a model answer nor a complete response, and it does not
exemplify required content. Students may reach a given level by making one or more comments of the
quality demonstrated by the Indicative Standard and do not have to meet all the skill descriptors at that
level.
The standardising scripts will further exemplify each of the levels. You must refer to the standardising
material throughout your marking.
Step 1 Annotate the response
When marking a response you should first read through the student’s answer and annotate each section
using the comments from the statement bank to show the qualities that are being demonstrated, as
instructed during standardising. You can then award a level and a mark.
Step 2 Determine a level
Start at the lowest level of the mark scheme and use it as a ladder to see whether the answer meets the
descriptors for that level. The descriptors for the level indicate the different qualities that might be seen
in the student’s answer for that level. If it meets the lowest level then go to the next one and decide if it
meets this level, and so on, until you have a match between the level descriptor and the answer. With
practice and familiarity you will find that for better answers you will be able to quickly skip through the
lower levels of the mark scheme.
The Indicative Standard column in the mark scheme will help you determine the correct level.
Remember, students may reach a given level by making one or more comments of the quality
demonstrated by the Indicative Standard and do not have to meet all the skill descriptors at that level. It
is not the number of references, but the quality of the comments that will determine the level. The
annotation you added to the script at Step 1 will help you determine the correct level.
3

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
Step 3 Determine a mark
Once you have assigned a level you need to decide on the mark. This requires you to fine tune within
the level to see how well each of the skills descriptors for that level has been met. A student only has to
meet a skills descriptor at a given level once to be awarded that level. Since responses rarely match a
level in all respects, you need to balance out the range of skills achieved and allow strong performance
in some aspects to compensate for other skills that may be only partially fulfilled. Again, the annotation
added at Step 1 will help you determine the mark.
Reference to the standardising scripts throughout the marking period is essential. This will help you
apply the level descriptors accurately and consistently. There will usually be an answer in the
standardising materials which will correspond with each level of the mark scheme. This answer will have
been awarded a mark by the Lead Examiner. You can compare the student’s answer with the example
to determine if it is the same standard, better or worse than the example. You can then use this to
allocate a mark for the answer based on the Lead Examiner’s mark on the example.
You may well need to read back through the answer as you apply the mark scheme to clarify points and
assure yourself that the level and the mark are appropriate.
An answer which contains nothing of relevance to the question must be awarded no marks.
Advice
In fairness to students, all examiners must use the same marking methods. The following advice may
seem obvious, but all examiners must follow it closely.
1. Refer constantly to the mark scheme and standardising scripts throughout the marking period.
2. Always credit accurate, relevant and appropriate responses that are not necessarily covered by the
mark scheme or the standardising scripts.
3. Use the full range of marks. Do not hesitate to give full marks if the response merits it.
4. Remember the key to accurate and fair marking is consistency.
5. If you have any doubt about how to allocate marks to a response, consult your Team Leader.
4

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
SECTION A: READING – Assessment Objectives
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas.
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts.
AO2 • Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to
achieve effects and influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to
support their views.
AO3 • Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as how these are
conveyed, across two or more texts.
AO4 • Evaluate texts critically and support this with appropriate textual references.
SECTION B: WRITING – Assessment Objectives
AO5 • Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting
tone, style and register for different forms, purposes and audiences.
• Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features
to support coherence and cohesion of texts.
AO6 • Candidates must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for
clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling and punctuation. (This
requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for each specification as a
whole).
5

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023

Assessment
|     |     | Section A  |
| --- | --- | ---------- |
Objective

|     | AO1  |     |
| --- | ---- | ---- |

|     | AO2  |     |
| --- | ---- | ---- |

|     | AO3  | N/A  |
| --- | ---- | ---- |

|     | AO4  |     |
| --- | ---- | ---- |

|     |     | Section B  |
| --- | --- | ---------- |


AO5

|     | AO6  |     |
| --- | ---- | ---- |

|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
6

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
0 1 Read again the first part of the source, from lines 1 to 6.
List four things about hyenas from this part of the source.
[4 marks]
Give 1 mark for each point about hyenas:
• responses must be drawn only from lines 1 to 6 of the text
• responses must relate to what we learn about hyenas (not Pi, the narrator)
• students may quote or paraphrase
• a paraphrased response covering more than one point should be credited for each point made –
though paraphrased responses must demonstrate evidence of identification of information that is
specific to the focus of the question as required by AO1
• responses that copy the whole section of the text from lines 1 to 4 verbatim should not be credited any
marks as this does not provide any evidence of identification of information that is specific to the focus
of the question as required by AO1.
Note: The indicative content must not be treated as exhaustive, and reference must be made to the
selected section of the text.
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts
This assesses bullet point 1: identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
Indicative content
Students may include:
• Hyenas cause worry [] 1 mark
• Hyenas worry Pi / the narrator/me []
• Hyenas attack zebras []
• Hyenas attack gnus []
• Hyenas attack water buffaloes []
• Hyenas attack buffaloes []
• Hyenas attack []
• Hyenas are hunters []
• Hyenas are hardy []
• Hyenas are resilient []
• Hyenas are determined []
• Hyenas are tough []
• Hyenas rise up from kicking []
• Hyenas rise up from butting []
• Hyenas never give up []
• Hyenas are clever []
• Hyenas distract their prey from its mother []
• Hyenas don’t just attack old [] or infirm animals [] 2 marks
• Hyenas attack any animal [] they can run down []
• Hyenas are hardy [] attackers []
• Hyenas will attack [] the full-grown members [] (must include the words ‘full-grown’ for 2 marks)
• Hyenas attack [ ] in packs [ ]
• Hyenas attack [ ] in groups [ ]
7

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
• Hyenas attack [ ] in packs [ ] any animal they can run down. [] 3 marks
• Hyenas attack zebras [ ] gnus [ ] water buffalos [ ]
• Hyenas rise up from ‘kickings’ [ ] and ‘buttings’ [] immediately []
• Hyenas will attack [ ] the full-grown members [ ] of a herd []
• Hyenas rise up from ‘kickings’ [ ] and ‘buttings’ [] immediately [] never 4 marks but 5 ticks
giving up [] for simple lack of will []
NB: Only award ‘Hyena’s attack’ once. For example, a response which reads:
1. Hyenas attack []
2. Hyenas attack zebras []
3. Hyenas attack water-buffalo []
would score 3 marks in total
Reject:
• Pi is worried about the hyena (or anything related to Pi or his father, not hyenas)
• Hyenas get distracted
• Hyenas have a simple lack of will
• Hyenas attack in the water
• Hyenas rise up
• Anything that can be distracted from its mother is good.
Ask yourself the following questions:
• Does it tell you something about hyenas?
• Is it from the correct section of the text?
• Is it true/accurate?
• If you precede the response with ‘Hyenas are…’ or ‘Hyenas have…’ does it make sense?
0 2 Look in detail at this extract, from lines 10 to 19 of the source:
How does the writer use language here to describe the hyena’s appearance?
You could include the writer’s choice of:
• words and phrases
• language features and techniques
• sentence forms.
[8 marks]
AO2
Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to achieve effects and
influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to support their views
This question assesses Language ie: Words/Phrases/Language Features/Language
Techniques/Sentence Forms
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
8

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
This indicative standard is not a model answer, nor a complete
response. Nor does it seek to exemplify any particular content.
Rather, it is an indication of the standard for the level.
Level 4 Shows perceptive and The writer’s description of the hyena criticises its
Perceptive, detailed understanding of unpleasant appearance and introduces the idea of it
detailed language: being a malicious threat. The adjective ‘ugly’ labels
analysis • Analyses the effects of the the hyena as grotesque straight away and this is
writer’s choices of further emphasised by the harshness of the
7–8 marks language dismissive short sentence. The writer has also
• Selects a range of chosen the phrase ‘beyond redemption’ because
judicious textual detail ‘redemption’ has connotations of being saved from
• Makes sophisticated and evil, as if the hyena’s ugliness is symbolic of a
accurate use of subject deeper sinister nature that cannot be reversed.
terminology
Level 3 Shows clear understanding of The writer makes the hyena’s unpleasant
Clear, relevant language: appearance clear from the start when he says ‘it
explanation • Explains clearly the effects was ugly beyond redemption’. This short sentence
of the writer’s choices of is deliberately blunt and the adjective ‘ugly’
5–6 marks language introduces the animal as hideous. This ugliness
• Selects a range of relevant along with the use of the word ‘redemption’ suggests
textual detail there is nothing about this animal that could be
• Makes clear and accurate saved as it has no redeeming features.
use of subject terminology
Level 2 Shows some understanding The writer uses adjectives to make the hyena’s
Some of language: appearance seem unpleasant, ‘ugly beyond
understanding • Attempts to comment on redemption’. This phrase suggests that the hyena is
and comment the effect of language so horrible to look at that there is nothing that could
• Selects some appropriate be done about it. There is no chance that anyone
3–4 marks textual detail could ever see a hyena as attractive.
• Makes some use of subject
terminology, mainly
appropriately
Level 1 Shows simple awareness of The writer makes the hyena sound like a really ugly
Simple, limited language: animal. It says ‘it is ugly beyond redemption’. The
comment • Offers simple comment on writer has used an adjective to show the reader that
the effect of language this is not a nice animal to look at.
1–2 marks • Selects simple references
or textual details
• Makes simple use of
subject terminology, not
always appropriately
Level 0
Nothing to reward
No marks
Note: If a student writes only about language outside of the given lines, the response should be
placed in either Level 1 or Level 2, according to the quality of what is written.
AO2 content may include the effect of language features such as:
9

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
• adjectives: ‘ugly’ ‘shaggy’ ‘coarse’ to emphasise the unpleasant appearance of the hyena
• verbs: ‘bungled’ to suggest the hyena is not a perfect creation, causing either a sense of disgust or
sympathy
• contrast: ‘none of the classy ostentation of a leopard’s’ to compare the hyena unfavourably to a
familiar animal that the reader would be likely to consider beautiful
• simile: ‘like the symptoms of a skin disease’ to exaggerate the unpleasant appearance of the
hyena’s spots, although again this may also arouse sympathy
• adverbs: ‘too massive’ ‘ridiculously mouse-like’ ’too big’ to intensify the hyena’s disproportionate
features
• humour/hyperbole: ‘suffering from a receding hairline’ to mock the hyena’s appearance, although
‘suffering’ could be read sympathetically
• short (declarative) sentences: ‘The nostrils are too big.’ to add to the harsh, dismissive tone of the
description
• antithesis: ‘doglike, but like no dog anyone would want as a pet’ to present the contrast between the
hyena and a more domestic animal.
10

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
0 3 You now need to think about the whole of the source.
The text is from the middle of a novel.
How has the writer structured the text to interest you as a reader?
You could write about:
• what the writer focuses your attention on at the beginning of the source
• how and why the writer changes this focus as the source develops
• any other structural features that interest you.
[8 marks]
AO2
Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to achieve effects and
influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to support their views
This question assesses how the writer has structured a text. Structural features can be: at a
whole text level eg beginnings/endings/perspective shifts; at a paragraph level eg topic
change/aspects of cohesion; and at a sentence level when judged to contribute to whole structure.
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard is not a model answer, nor a complete
response. Nor does it seek to exemplify any particular content.
Rather, it is an indication of the standard for the level.
Level 4 Shows perceptive and Firstly, the writer focuses on Pi being ‘worried’ -
Perceptive, detailed understanding of stemming from the recollection of his father’s words
detailed structural features: about the threat posed by hyenas - establishing an
analysis • Analyses the effects of anxious tone. Because Pi has been previously warned
the writer’s choices of and mentally prepared, the unpredictable danger from
7–8 marks structural features the hyena is presented as a valid threat early in the
• Selects a range of passage. The narrator presents the unequal power
judicious examples dynamic between himself and the animal, and therefore
• Makes sophisticated signals the subconscious sense of imminent danger
and accurate use of and potential harm (which is developed through the
subject terminology passage). However, by the end, this fear is shown to
have been unfounded, as the threat diminishes and the
hyena ‘did not move’ for the rest of the day.
Level 3 Shows clear Opening with ‘it was the hyena that worried me’, the
Clear, relevant understanding of structural writer immediately introduces the main element of
explanation features: tension. Then, by describing the hyena as a ‘hardy
• Explains clearly the attacker’ and as ‘clever’, this introduces the devious
5–6 marks effects of the writer’s abilities of the animal as a dangerous and unpredictable
choices of structural predator and explains therefore, why Pi is worried at the
features start of the text.
• Selects a range of
relevant examples
• Makes clear and
accurate use of subject
terminology
11

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
Level 2 Shows some The writer spends a long time focusing on the hyena at
Some understanding of structural the start of the source so that we know it is an important
understanding features: part of the story. By introducing in the first sentence
and comment • Attempts to comment on that ‘it was the hyena that worried me’, it foreshadows
the effect of structural the scary behaviour of the hyena. The description of
3–4 marks features the hyena builds tension as we start to realise what a
• Selects some horrible animal it is.
appropriate examples
• Makes some use of
subject terminology,
mainly appropriately
Level 1 Shows simple awareness The writer focuses on the hyena at the start of the
Simple, limited of structural features: source. The hyena is mentioned in the first sentence
comment • Offers simple comment when it says ‘it was the hyena that worried me’. This
on the effect of structure makes us wonder why he is so worried and what might
1–2 marks • Selects simple happen next, especially as we don’t know where the
reference(s) or hyena is or what it is doing. Then we get a lot of
example(s) description about hyenas so that we can picture it in our
• Makes simple use of mind.
subject terminology, not
always appropriately
Level 0 Nothing to reward
No marks
AO2 content may include the effect of structural features such as:
• exposition: background information about hyenas to allow the reader to appreciate the danger Pi
could be in
• foreshadowing: early references to Pi’s fear of the hyena, foreshadowing the incident that follows
• focus shifts: movement from action to description, including detailed portrayal of the hyena to
emphasise its hideous appearance and unpredictable nature
• first person perspective: the reader shares Pi’s thoughts and feelings and sees the hyena’s
appearance and behaviour (perhaps unreliably) through his eyes
• motifs: repeated reference to the hyena’s ‘typical’ behaviour to emphasise its unchanging nature, or
references to the horizon to represent the (perhaps fading) hope of the narrator
• rising action: increase of tension and pace as the hyena’s wild behaviour escalates
• juxtaposition: the hyena’s appearance and that of the ‘ostentation of the leopard’
• internal v external: the thoughts and feelings of Pi versus the appearance and behaviour of the
hyena
• anti-climax: sudden ending undercuts the previous threat of the hyena, releasing tension as the
hyena unexpectedly stops its wild behaviour.
12

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
0 4 Focus this part of your answer on the second part of the source, from line 20 to the end.
A student said, “This part of the story, where the hyena behaves wildly, is funny rather than
frightening. The writer suggests that the hyena is actually no serious threat to Pi.”
To what extent do you agree?
In your response, you could:
• consider your impressions of how the hyena behaves
• evaluate how the writer presents the threat of the hyena to Pi
• support your response with references to the text.
[20 marks]
AO4
Evaluate texts critically and support this with appropriate textual references
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard is not a model answer, nor a complete
response. Nor does it seek to exemplify any particular content.
Rather, it is an indication of the standard for the level.
Level 4 Shows perceptive and It would be easy to initially see the hyena’s wild
Perceptive, detailed evaluation: behaviour as frightening but when you look at how it is
detailed • Develops a convincing described then it is definitely more amusing. The way
evaluation and critical response to that it ‘ran in circles’ would be intimidating if it was
the focus of the statement circling its prey, but in fact it is just making itself
16–20 marks • Shows perceptive increasingly sick and confused, despite Pi remaining
understanding of writer’s frozen with fear. The writer uses the repeated circular
methods motion as a symbol for the hyena’s pointless
• Selects a range of behaviour, as if it does not have a clue what it is doing.
judicious textual detail This is made even more ridiculous by the repetition of
• Evaluates critically and in the onomatopoeic ‘yip’ noise that the animal makes.
While this going on ‘all morning’ would certainly be
detail the effect(s) on the
annoying, it is hardly the noise of a ferocious predator
reader
and the more you say the sound the more trivial it
actually becomes. The repetitive nature of both
movement and sound emphasises to the reader the
bizarre performance that Pi is forced to endure until the
sudden anti-climax removes any remaining sense of a
threat altogether.
13

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
Level 3 Shows clear and relevant While Pi is understandably frightened of the hyena, it
Clear, evaluation: soon becomes clear that its behaviour is more amusing
relevant • Makes a clear and than threatening. It says ‘All morning the hyena ran in
evaluation relevant response to the circles going yip yip yip yip yip’. This pattern of circling
focus of the statement might remind the reader of a predator circling its prey
11–15 marks • Shows clear but in fact doing laps of the boat is all that the hyena
understanding of writer’s does so it soon stops being frightening. While the
methods writer’s repetition of the onomatopoeic ‘yip’ sound
• Selects a range of makes the hyena seem relentless, it is more of an
relevant textual amusing sound than it is a terrifying one and it is
perhaps more the fact that it goes on ‘all morning’ that
references
• Evaluates clearly the wears Pi down. The longer this repeated movement
and sound goes on, the less of a surprise it is to us
effect(s) on the reader
when the hyena suddenly collapses and the threat
disappears.
Level 2 Shows some attempts at Pi is clearly frightened of the hyena up until the very
Some, evaluation: end of the extract but a lot of the things that the hyena
evaluation • Makes some response to does are actually quite funny. It says ‘All morning the
the focus of the statement hyena ran in circles going yip yip yip yip yip’. Apart
6–10 marks • Shows some from showing how fast it is, this movement doesn’t
understanding of writer’s actually result in the hyena attacking Pi in any way.
methods The writer has repeated the ‘yip’ sound so that we can
• Selects some appropriate see how loud and annoying it would be for Pi who has
textual reference(s) to listen to it all morning. However it is not actually a
• Makes some evaluative very threatening sound and it stops suddenly at the end
of the extract when the hyena just gives up. The
comment(s) on effect(s)
reader is now certain that Pi was never under any
on the reader
threat at all.
Level 1 Shows simple, limited Even though the hyena seems frightening at first, it
Simple, evaluation: doesn’t actually hurt Pi and ends up just making itself
limited • Makes a simple, limited sick and giving up. It says ‘All morning the hyena ran
comment response to the focus of in circles going yip yip yip yip yip’. This is strange
the statement behaviour but the hyena never properly attacks Pi so
1–5 marks • Shows limited there is no reason for him to be as frightened as he
understanding of writer’s seems to be. The writer uses the sounds of the animal
methods so that the reader can imagine what it is doing and the
• Selects simple, limited noise it is making. You could definitely see why an
textual reference(s) animal behaving like this would be funny to watch but it
• Makes simple, limited is not really very scary and the ending makes this clear
because Pi isn’t hurt at all.
evaluative comment(s) on
effect(s) on reader
Level 0 Nothing to reward.
No marks
Note: Reference to the writer’s methods may be implicit without specific mention of the writer.
Similarly, the evaluative ‘I do/I don’t agree’ may be implicit.
In both these cases credit should be given according to the quality of what is written.
AO4 content may include the evaluation of ideas and methods such as:
14

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
• Pi’s wariness of the hyena, shown through a first-person perspective and presented by his thoughts,
feelings and actions, ‘seized with fear’, although these thoughts could be seen as unreliable
• description of the hyena running, with dynamic verbs such as ‘beating’, ‘clicking’ and ‘racing’ to
emphasise its speed and strength, especially alongside threatening references such as ‘maniacal
beast’
• the increasing tension of the section, emphasised by the use of short sentences, ‘I prepared for my
end’ to enhance the danger of the situation, although this could be seen as hyperbole
• the repeated ‘circling’ of the hyena, showing a sustained threat and symbolising Pi’s feelings of fear
and entrapment, although it could also show the ridiculousness of the hyena’s behaviour
• the use of sounds, including the repeated ‘yip’, to reflect the relentless nature of the hyena’s
behaviour, although this could be seen as more humorous than threatening
• the contrast of the ‘horizon’ representing a ‘salvation’ that Pi is at risk of losing if the hyena kills him
• the sudden, anti-climactic ending, where the hyena suddenly and comically collapses, reveals Pi’s
over-reaction to its threat.
15

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
0 5 A wildlife magazine is running a creative writing competition and the winning entry will be
published in its next edition.
Either
Write a description of a zoo or wildlife park as suggested by this picture:
or
Write a story about a human meeting an animal.
(24 marks for content and organisation
16 marks for technical accuracy)
[40 marks]
16

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
AO5 Content and Organisation
Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting tone, style and register for
different forms, purposes and audiences.
Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features to support coherence and
cohesion of texts.
| Level    |        | Skills descriptors  |
| -------- | ------ | ------------------- |
| Level 4  | Upper  |                     |
Content
|     | Level 4  | •  Communication is convincing and compelling   |
| --- | -------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
•
19–24 marks    Tone, style and register are assuredly matched to purpose and
|     | 22–24  | audience  |
| --- | ------ | --------- |

Compelling,  marks  •  Extensive and ambitious vocabulary with sustained crafting of
linguistic devices
Convincing
Communication
|     |     | Organisation  |
| --- | --- | ------------- |
•  Varied and inventive use of structural features
•  Writing is compelling, incorporating a range of convincing and
complex ideas
•  Fluently linked paragraphs with seamlessly integrated discourse
markers
|     | Lower    | Content                          |
| --- | -------- | -------------------------------- |
|     | Level 4  | •  Communication is convincing   |
  •  Tone, style and register are convincingly matched to purpose and
|     | 19–21  | audience  |
| --- | ------ | --------- |
•
marks  Extensive vocabulary with conscious crafting of linguistic devices

Organisation
•  Varied and effective structural features
•  Writing is highly engaging with a range of developed complex
ideas
•  Consistently coherent use of paragraphs with integrated discourse
markers
| Level 3  | Upper    | Content                                 |
| -------- | -------- | --------------------------------------- |
|          | Level 3  | •  Communication is consistently clear  |
13–18 marks    •  Tone, style and register are clearly and consistently matched to
|     | 16–18  | purpose and audience  |
| --- | ------ | --------------------- |
•  Increasingly sophisticated vocabulary and phrasing, chosen for
| Consistent,  | marks  |     |
| ------------ | ------ | --- |
Clear    effect with a range of successful linguistic devices
Communication
|     |     | Organisation  |
| --- | --- | ------------- |
•
Effective use of structural features
•  Writing is engaging, using a range of clear, connected ideas
•  Coherent paragraphs with integrated discourse markers
17

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
Lower Content
Level 3 • Communication is generally clear
• Tone, style and register are generally matched to purpose and
13–15 audience
marks • Vocabulary clearly chosen for effect and appropriate use of
linguistic devices
Organisation
• Usually effective use of structural features
• Writing is engaging, with a range of connected ideas
• Usually coherent paragraphs with range of discourse markers
Level 2 Upper Content
Level 2 • Communicates with some sustained success
7–12 marks • Some sustained attempt to match tone, style and register to
10–12 purpose and audience
Some successful marks • Conscious use of vocabulary with some use of linguistic devices
Communication
Organisation
• Some use of structural features
• Increasing variety of linked and relevant ideas
• Some use of paragraphs and some use of discourse markers
Lower Content
Level 2 • Communicates with some success
• Attempts to match tone, style and register to purpose and
7–9 audience
marks • Begins to vary vocabulary with some use of linguistic devices
Organisation
• Attempts to use structural features
• Some linked and relevant ideas
• Attempt to write in paragraphs with some discourse markers, not
always appropriate
18

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
| Level 1  | Upper  | Content  |
| -------- | ------ | -------- |
•
|     | Level 1  | Communicates simply  |
| --- | -------- | -------------------- |
1–6 marks    •  Simple awareness of matching tone, style and register to purpose
|     | 4–6  | and audience  |
| --- | ---- | ------------- |
•  Simple vocabulary; simple linguistic devices
Simple, Limited  marks
|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
Communication
|     |     | Organisation  |
| --- | --- | ------------- |
•  Evidence of simple structural features
•
One or two relevant ideas, simply linked
•  Random paragraph structure

|     | Lower  | Content  |
| --- | ------ | -------- |
•
|     | Level 1  | Limited communication  |
| --- | -------- | ---------------------- |
  •  Occasional sense of matching tone, style and register to purpose
|     | 1–3  | and audience  |
| --- | ---- | ------------- |
•  Simple vocabulary
marks
|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |
Organisation
•  Limited or no evidence of structural features
•
One or two unlinked ideas
•  No paragraphs
Level 0  Students will not have offered any meaningful writing to assess.
| No marks  | Nothing to reward.  |     |
| --------- | ------------------- | --- |

19

PMT
MARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2023
AO6 Technical Accuracy
Students must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with
accurate spelling and punctuation. (This requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for each
specification as a whole.)
Level Skills descriptors
Level 4 • Sentence demarcation is consistently secure and consistently accurate
• Wide range of punctuation is used with a high level of accuracy
13–16 marks
• Uses a full range of appropriate sentence forms for effect
• Uses Standard English consistently and appropriately with secure control of
complex grammatical structures
• High level of accuracy in spelling, including ambitious vocabulary
• Extensive and ambitious use of vocabulary
Level 3 • Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and mostly accurate
• Range of punctuation is used, mostly with success
9–12 marks
• Uses a variety of sentence forms for effect
• Mostly uses Standard English appropriately with mostly controlled grammatical
structures
• Generally accurate spelling, including complex and irregular words
• Increasingly sophisticated use of vocabulary
Level 2 • Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and sometimes accurate
• Some control of a range of punctuation
5–8 marks
• Attempts a variety of sentence forms
• Some use of Standard English with some control of agreement
• Some accurate spelling of more complex words
• Varied use of vocabulary
Level 1 • Occasional use of sentence demarcation
• Some evidence of conscious punctuation
1–4 marks
• Simple range of sentence forms
• Occasional use of Standard English with limited control of agreement
• Accurate basic spelling
• Simple use of vocabulary
Level 0 Students’ spelling, punctuation etc is sufficiently poor to prevent understanding or
No marks meaning.
20
